The spatial filtering techniques used for noise reduction (or smoothing) are as follows:
 Spatial low-pass, high-pass and band-Pass filtering
 Unsharp masking and crisping
 Directional smoothing
 Median filtering
 
 
What is low-pass and high-pass filterig?
 
 low-pass filtering attenuates the high-frequency components in the signal and is essentially equivalent to integrating the signal. Integration in turn implies summation
 and averaging the signal. Low-pass filtering of an image is a spatial averaging operation. It produces an output image, which is a smooth version of the
 original image, devoid of the high spatial frequency components that may be present in the image. In particular, this operation is useful in removing visual
 noise, which generally appears as sharp bright points in the image. Such high spatial frequencies associated with these spikes are attenuated by the low-pass
 filter.
 Low-pass filters such as:
 1-Ideal low-pass filter
 2-Butterworth low-pass filter
 3-Gaussian low-pass filter
 
 High-pass filtering of an image, on the other hand, produces an output image in which the low spatial frequency components are attenuated. The
 cut off frequency at which lower frequencies are attenuated is varied by the selection of filter coefficients. High-pass filtering is used for edge enhancement.
 Since the sharpness of an image is related to the content of high-frequency components, low-pass filtering leads to blurring, while high-pass filtering is
 used for deblurring.
 Such a filter can easily be implemented by subtracting the low-pass output from its input. 
 Typically, the low-pass filter would perform a relatively longterm spatial average, on a 3 x 3 or 5 x 5 or larger window.
 
 
Averaging and Spatial Low-Pass Filtering 
 Spatial filtering term is the filtering operation which is performed directly on the pixels on an image. 
 The process includes simply of moving the filter mask from point to point in an image.
 When each pixel is replaced by a weighted average of its neighborhood pixels, the resulting image a low pass filtered image.
 The spatial averaging operation on an image may be used to smooth the noise. by performing spatial averaging the image noise power is reduced by a factor equal to
 the number of pixels chosen in the neighborhood of the central pixel. Such as Mean and Gaussian.
 There are two categories of smoothing filters:
 1- Linear such as: Mean, Weiner, Gaussian
 2- Non-Linear such as: Min, Max, Median
 
 The Min filter selects the smallest value within the pixel and is useful for finding darkest points. Therefore, good for pepper noise.
 The Max filter selects the largest value within the pixel and is useful for finding brightest points. Therefore, good for salt noise.
 The Median smooths pixels whih are significantly different from their surroundings without damaging other pixels. Good for salt and pepper noise.
 
Directional Smoothing
 Low-pass filters always result in blurring the image and quite often the crisp edges are blurred by averaging. 
 To minimize this effect, directional averaging filter can be used. Spatial averages g(rn,n;8) are calculated in several directions theta.  
 
 
 
 
 References:
 -Image processing principles and applications by Tinku Acharya and Ajoy K. Ray
 -https://www.slideshare.net/hiiampallavi15/smoothing-in-digital-image-processing
 
 
